Update documentation (#128)
plone/meta: config/README.md

# Configure a package

The `config-package.py` is the script that configures a given repository
to follow the standards agreed upon by the Plone community.

## Quick start

To configure a repository run the following commands:

```shell
python3.11 -m venv venv
. venv/bin/activate
pip install -r requirements.txt
python config-package.py PATH/TO/PACKAGE
```

> That's it :-)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That's it. :-)
```

Now, you can use the `tox` commands
to adapt the repository just configured!

## Configuration files

> In a nutshell what `plone/meta` does

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a nutshell `plone/meta`, puts some configuration files on the repository.
```

> is to put some configuration files on the repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Currently, the files being managed by `plone/meta` are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently the files managed by `plone/meta` are the following.
```

- `.meta.toml`: `plone/meta`'s configuration file

> - `.editorconfig`: configuration meant to be read by IDEs

Reviewer: Lots of people do not use IDEs.

```suggestion
- `.editorconfig`: configuration meant to be read by code editors
```

- `.flake8`: [`flake8`](https://pypi.org/project/flake8) configuration
- `.gitignore`: list of file/folders patterns that `git` should ignore
- `.github/workflows/meta.yml`: GitHub Actions to run the testing and QA tools on GitHub
- `.pre-commit-config.yaml`: [`pre-commit`](https://pypi.org/project/pre-commit) configuration

> - `pyproject.toml`: configuration options for a wide variety of python tooling

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `pyproject.toml`: configuration options for a wide variety of Python tooling
```

- `tox.ini`: [`tox`](https://pypi.org/project/tox) configuration, __the most important file__

You can find the _template_ files for each of these files
in the `config/default` folder of this `plone/meta` repository.

> You will notice that they have a `.jinja` extension,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will notice that they have a `.jinja` extension.
```

> that's because the files are not merely copied over to the target repository,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That's because the files are not merely copied over to the target repository,
```

> but rather they are enhanced/adapted on the way there.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
but rather they are enhanced and adapted on the way there.
```

> See the next section about how to extend/modify these configuration files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See the next section about how to extend and modify these configuration files.
```

## Configuration options

One thing is trying to standardize,
but another thing is being flexible enough

> to adapt to each repositories' special needs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is one thing to standardize, yet another to be flexible enough to adapt to each repository's particular needs.
```

Fortunately `plone/meta` tries its best to accomplish both:

- it provides sane defaults

> - it allows to extend the defaults with custom configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- it allows extension of the defaults with custom configuration
```

The files mentioned above have comments all over them

> with instructions on how to extend/modify/influence

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with instructions on how to extend, modify, and influence
```

what `plone/meta` ends up adding on those files.

Those options are to be stored,
as it is mentioned on the comments themselves,

> on `.meta.toml`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in `.meta.toml`.
```

> This way, when the configuration files get re-generated,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This way, when the configuration files get regenerated,
```

> `plone/meta` reads the configuration on `.meta.toml`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`plone/meta` reads the configuration in `.meta.toml`
```

> and re-applies the specific configuration on the other files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and reapplies the specific configuration on the other files.
```

> See the specific configuration files sections below on how to extend/modify each configuration file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See the specific configuration files sections below on how to extend and modify each configuration file.
```

### Configuration philosophy

The idea behind the configuration system
in `plone/meta` controlled configuration files is to make it as simple as possible.

Rather than adding plenty of configuration options,

> almost all configuration files have a `extra_lines`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
almost all configuration files have an `extra_lines` section
```

that allows you to paste as much configuration as you want there.

> This way providing a simple, yet powerful, extension mechanism.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this way, it provides a simple, yet powerful, extension mechanism.
```

> There are a few, and growing, other configuration options on for a few files,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are a few, and growing, other configuration options in a few files,
```

where the simple approach described above is not enough.

### More configuration options

Please, use the [issue tracker](https://github.com/plone/meta/issues/new)
to ask for more extension points whenever `plone/meta`
does not fulfill all your needs.

### `.editorconfig`

> ```

Reviewer: All TOML examples should use the `toml` lexer.

````suggestion
```toml
````

Author: Thanks, done!

##
# Add extra configuration options in .meta.toml:
#  [editorconfig]
#  extra_lines = """
#  _your own configuration lines_
#  """
##
```

> Add the `[editorconfig]` TOML table on `.meta.toml`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add the `[editorconfig]` TOML table in `.meta.toml`,
```

and set extra configuration for `editorconfig` under the `extra_lines` key.

> 

Reviewer: I am not clear. Do I add stuff into the file in the heading `.editorconfig`, into `.meta.toml`, both, or either? If either, which config "wins"?

Also I think the narrative text should be placed above the configuration code sample. The pattern is, "You will do a thing, and here is an example of how to do the thing."

Author: The idea is to add it on `.meta.toml` and when re-running the `config-package.py` it will read `.meta.toml` and add the configuration there on the managed files (`.editorconfig` in this case).

I will put the narrative above 👍🏾

### `.flake8`

```
##
# Add extra configuration options in .meta.toml:
#  [flake8]
#  extra_lines = """
#  _your own configuration lines_
#  """
##
```

> Add the `[flake8]` TOML table on `.meta.toml`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add the `[flake8]` TOML table in `.meta.toml`,
```

and set the extra configuration for `flake8` under the `extra_lines` key.

### `.gitignore`

```
##
# Add extra configuration options in .meta.toml:
#  [gitignore]
#  extra_lines = """
#  _your own configuration lines_
#  """
##
```

> Add the `[gitignore]` TOML table on `.meta.toml`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add the `[gitignore]` TOML table in `.meta.toml`,
```

and set the extra configuration for `git` under the `extra_lines` key.

### `.github/workflows/meta.yml`

> _So far it does not have any configuration option_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_At this time there are no configuration options_.
```

### `.pre-commit-config.yaml`

```
##
# Add extra configuration options in .meta.toml:
#  [pre_commit]
#  extra_lines = """
#  _your own configuration lines_
#  """
##
```

> Add the `[pre_commit]` TOML table on `.meta.toml`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add the `[pre_commit]` TOML table in `.meta.toml`,
```

and set the extra configuration for `pre-commit` under the `extra_lines` key.

```
##
# Add extra configuration options in .meta.toml:
#  [pre_commit]
#  zpretty_extra_lines = """
#  _your own configuration lines_
#  """
##
```

Extend [`zpretty`](https://pypi.org/project/zpretty) configuration
by setting the values on the `zpretty_extra_lines` key.

```
##
# Add extra configuration options in .meta.toml:
#  [pre_commit]
#  codespell_extra_lines = """
#  _your own configuration lines_
#  """
##
```

Extend [`codespell`](https://pypi.org/project/codespell) configuration
by setting the values on the `codespell_extra_lines` key.

### `pyproject.toml`

> `towncrier` configuration: depending on the extension of your `CHANGES` file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`towncrier` configuration: depending on the extension of your `CHANGES` file,
```

`plone/meta` will adapt the configuration for `towncrier`.

> It's authomatic, you don't need to do anything!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's automatic, you don't need to do anything!
```

```
##
# Add extra configuration options in .meta.toml:
#  [pyproject]
#  extra_lines = """
#  _your own configuration lines_
#  """
##
```

> Add the `[pyproject]` TOML table on `.meta.toml`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add the `[pyproject]` TOML table in `.meta.toml`,
```

and set extra configuration for any extra tool that you use

> under the `extra_lines` key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for the `extra_lines` key.
```

```
##
# Add extra configuration options in .meta.toml:
#  [pyproject]
#  codespell_ignores = "foo,bar"
#  codespell_skip = "*.po,*.map,package-lock.json"
##
```

Extend [`codespell`](https://pypi.org/project/codespell) configuration

> by setting the values on the `codespell_ignores` and `codespell_skip` keys.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
by setting the values for the `codespell_ignores` and `codespell_skip` keys.
```

```
##
# Add extra configuration options in .meta.toml:
#  [pyproject]
#  dependencies_ignores = "['zestreleaser.towncrier']"
#  dependencies_mappings = [
#    "gitpython = ['git']",
#    "pygithub = ['github']",
#  ]
#  """
##
```

Extend [`z3c.dependencychecker`](https://pypi.org/project/z3c.dependencychecker) configuration

> by setting the values on the `dependencies_ignores` and `dependencies_mappings` keys.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
by setting the values for the `dependencies_ignores` and `dependencies_mappings` keys.
```

```
##
# Add extra configuration options in .meta.toml:
#  [pyproject]
#  check_manifest_ignores = """
#      "*.map.js",
#      "*.pyc",
#  """
##
```

Extend [`check-manifest`](https://pypi.org/project/check-manifest) configuration

> by setting the values on the `check_manifest_ignores` key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
by setting the values for the `check_manifest_ignores` key.
```

### `tox.ini`

Depending on the test runner that you want to use,
`plone/meta` will adapt `tox.ini` to it.

> Set the on the `[tox]` TOML table on `.meta.toml`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the `[tox]` TOML table in `.meta.toml`, set the value for the key `test_runner` to `pytest` if you want to use [`pytest`](https://pypi.org/project/pytest).
```

> the key `test_runner` to `pytest` if you want to use [`pytest`](https://pypi.org/project/pytest).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> By default, it fallbacks to use [`zope.testrunner`]((https://pypi.org/project/zope.testrunner)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, it falls back to use [`zope.testrunner`]((https://pypi.org/project/zope.testrunner)).
```

Likewise, the root path where the tests are to be found can be specified
under the key `test_path`. By default, it is set to nothing,

> i.e. the repository top-level is already importable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that is, the repository's top-level is already importable
```

> and thus the tests can already be found directly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and thus the tests can be found directly.
```

> If either a `tests` or `src` folder exists they are used as a safe fallbacks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If either a `tests` or `src` folder exists, then they are used as a safe fallbacks.
```

```
##
# Add extra configuration options in .meta.toml:
#  [tox]
#  extra_lines = """
#  _your own configuration lines_
#  """
##
```

> Add the `[tox]` TOML table on `.meta.toml`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add the `[tox]` TOML table in `.meta.toml`,
```

#  """
#  config_lines = """
#  my_extra_top_level_tox_configuration_lines
#  """
##
```

Extend the list of default `tox` environments by using the `envlist_lines` key.

Add extra top level configuration for `tox` by using the `config_lines` key.

```
##
# Add extra configuration options in .meta.toml:
#  [tox]
#  test_extras = """
#      tests
#      widgets
#  """
##
```

Extend the list of `extras` that need to be installed to run the test suite
and generate the coverage report by setting them on the `test_extras` key.

## Detailed script usage

As said above, the `config-package.py` script is the tool to apply the configuration.

See its `--help` for the up-to-date possible options.

### CLI arguments

The following arguments are supported.

`--commit-msg=MSG`: use `MSG` as commit message instead of the default one

`--no-commit`: don't automatically commit changes after the configuration run

`--push`: push changes at the end of the configuration run.
By default, the changes are __not__ pushed

`--branch`: define a specific git branch name to be created for the changes.
By default, the script creates one which includes the name of the configuration type.

> __Tip:__ Use "current" to update the current branch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
__Tip:__ Use `current` to update the current branch.
```

> `--tox`: whether to run `tox` already on the repository, by default it is not run.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`--tox`: whether to run `tox` on the repository. By default it is not run.
```

The following options are only needed one time
as their values are stored in `.meta.toml.`.

> `--type`: define the configuration type, by now `default` is the only option

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`--type`: define the configuration type. At this time, `default` is the only option.
```

## Other scripts

### Calling a script on multiple repositories

The `config-package.py` script only runs on a single repository.

> To update multiple repositories at once you can use `multi-call.py`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To update multiple repositories at once, you can use `multi-call.py`.
```

It runs a given script on all repositories listed in a `packages.txt` file.

#### Usage

> To run a script on all packages listed in a `packages.txt` file call

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To run a script on all packages listed in a `packages.txt` file, call
```

> `multi-call.py` the following way::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`multi-call.py` as follows.
```

# Configure a package

The `config-package.py` is the script that configures a given repository
to follow the standards agreed upon by the Plone community.

## Quick start

To configure a repository run the following commands:

```shell

> python3.11 -m venv venv

Reviewer: It just occurred to me that we should perhaps not refer to an explicit version of Python 3, but instead do the following, which is more common and would require less maintenance to document. Thoughts?

```suggestion
python3 -m venv venv
```

In a nutshell `plone/meta`, puts some configuration files on the repository.

Currently the files managed by `plone/meta` are the following.

- `.meta.toml`: `plone/meta`'s configuration file
- `.editorconfig`: configuration meant to be read by code editors
- `.flake8`: [`flake8`](https://pypi.org/project/flake8) configuration
- `.gitignore`: list of file/folders patterns that `git` should ignore
- `.github/workflows/meta.yml`: GitHub Actions to run the testing and QA tools on GitHub
- `.pre-commit-config.yaml`: [`pre-commit`](https://pypi.org/project/pre-commit) configuration
- `pyproject.toml`: configuration options for a wide variety of Python tooling
- `tox.ini`: [`tox`](https://pypi.org/project/tox) configuration, __the most important file__

You can find the _template_ files for each of these files
in the `config/default` folder of this `plone/meta` repository.

You will notice that they have a `.jinja` extension.
That's because the files are not merely copied over to the target repository,
but rather they are enhanced and adapted on the way there.

See the next section about how to extend and modify these configuration files.

## Configuration options

> One thing is trying to standardize,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> but another thing is being flexible enough

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

- it provides sane defaults
- it allows extension of the defaults with custom configuration

The files mentioned above have comments all over them
with instructions on how to extend, modify, and influence
what `plone/meta` ends up adding on those files.

Those options are to be stored,
as it is mentioned on the comments themselves,
in `.meta.toml`.

This way, when the configuration files get regenerated,
`plone/meta` reads the configuration in `.meta.toml`
and reapplies the specific configuration on the other files.

See the specific configuration files sections below on how to extend and modify each configuration file.

### Configuration philosophy

The idea behind the configuration system
in `plone/meta` controlled configuration files is to make it as simple as possible.

Rather than adding plenty of configuration options,
almost all configuration files have an `extra_lines` section
that allows you to paste as much configuration as you want there.

In this way, it provides a simple, yet powerful, extension mechanism.

There are a few, and growing, other configuration options in a few files,
where the simple approach described above is not enough.

### More configuration options

> Please, use the [issue tracker](https://github.com/plone/meta/issues/new)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please use the [issue tracker](https://github.com/plone/meta/issues/new)
```

```toml
[pyproject]
codespell_ignores = "foo,bar"
codespell_skip = "*.po,*.map,package-lock.json"
```

Extend [`z3c.dependencychecker`](https://pypi.org/project/z3c.dependencychecker) configuration
by setting the values for the `dependencies_ignores` and `dependencies_mappings` keys.

```toml
[pyproject]
dependencies_ignores = "['zestreleaser.towncrier']"
dependencies_mappings = [
  "gitpython = ['git']",
  "pygithub = ['github']",
]
```

Extend [`check-manifest`](https://pypi.org/project/check-manifest) configuration
by setting the values for the `check_manifest_ignores` key.

```toml
[pyproject]
check_manifest_ignores = """
    "*.map.js",
    "*.pyc",
"""
```

### `tox.ini`

Depending on the test runner that you want to use,
`plone/meta` will adapt `tox.ini` to it.

In the `[tox]` TOML table in `.meta.toml`, set the value for the key `test_runner` to `pytest` if you want to use [`pytest`](https://pypi.org/project/pytest).
By default, it falls back to use [`zope.testrunner`]((https://pypi.org/project/zope.testrunner)).

Likewise, the root path where the tests are to be found can be specified
under the key `test_path`. By default, it is set to nothing,

> that is, the repository's top-level is already importable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that is, the repository's top level is already importable
```

> Running this script stashes any uncommitted changes in the repositories,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Running this script stashes any uncommitted changes in the repositories.
```

> run `git stash pop` to recover them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run `git stash pop` to recover them.
```

### Re-enabling GitHub Actions

> After a certain period of time (currently 60 days) without commits GitHub

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After a certain period of time (currently 60 days) without commits, GitHub
```

automatically disables Actions. They can be re-enabled manually per repository.
There is a script to do this for all repositories. It does no harm if Actions
is already enabled for a repository.

#### Preparation

- Install GitHub's CLI application, see https://github.com/cli/cli.
- Authorize using the application:
  - `gh auth login`
  - It is probably enough to do it once.

#### Usage

To run the script just call it:

```shell
bin/python re-enable-actions.py
```

### Dropping support for legacy Python versions

> To drop support for Python 2.7 up to 3.6 several steps have to be done as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To drop support for Python 2.7 up to 3.6, several steps have to be done as
```

documented at https://zope.dev/developer/python2.html#how-to-drop-support.
There is a script to ease this process.

#### Preparation

> - The package to remove legacy python support from has to have a `.meta.toml`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The package from which to remove legacy Python support has to have a `.meta.toml`
```

>   file, aka it must be under control of the `config-package.py` script.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  file, in other words, it must be under control of the `config-package.py` script.
```
